Understanding Global Health Governance
- based on the analysis on World Health Assembly (WHA) Tiffany Davida RAMOUTAR,  Maéva CHABRIER, Lydia Zhuo CHEN, Heejae LEE
Introduction
	The World Health Organization (WHO) is the main organization in the global health arena connecting nations, partners and communities to promote the highest attainable standard of health for all(WHO, 2021). Since its establishment in 1948 as the designated agency on worldwide health matters, the WHO is tasked with norm-setting, standard-setting, policy option articulation, technical support provision, monitoring and assessment of health trends, and shaping the global health research agenda (Chorev, 2012). To deliver mandates and objectives, the WHO has a three-layered organizational structure. The World Health Assembly (WHA) is the main decision making organization each year, comprising 194 members, who meet each year to agree on the organization’s priorities and policies regarding global health (Chorev, 2012). The Executive Board (EB) meets twice a year to decide on the programme and budget estimates prepared by the Director-General and submits them to the Assembly with comments and recommendations (Chorev, 2012). The Secretariat functions as the bureaucratic body of the organization and is responsible for delivering the WHO’s programmes and campaigns (Chorev. 2012).

	This article is concerned with analyzing the research question, “How do we apply global governance theories and concepts to understand global health governance through the World Health Assembly?”. To develop this argument, the paper will focus on four main global governance concepts: power, design, legitimacy and complexity in its application to the WHA. The first section will focus on the power of academics in agenda-setting in the WHA, arguing that the role of traditionally minor actors such as academics are increasing in agenda-setting processes. Multiple actors represent multiple influences on the design of the organization. The second section will focus on the reasons, limits and consequences of the design features of the WHA through the Second Session 2 – and foresee impacts for the design of the WHO. Then, we could wonder if the decisions made at the global level are legitimate. The third section will examine the legitimating and delegitimating characteristics of WHA through input, output, and throughput.  The last section of the article will analyze how the case of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) can be an example of different actors exercising their legitimacy within WHA. This section aims to clarify how complexity theory and international regime complexity concepts can be applied to understand global health governance. 


I- Power and Global Health Governance

Examining the Power of Academics in Agenda-Setting in the 74th World Health Assembly
Tiffany Davida Ramoutar 
This report is concerned with the power dynamics that shaped agenda-setting in the 74th World Health Assembly (WHA). More specifically, this article argues that, in a changing world environment, traditionally minor actors like academics have increasing influence about the inclusion or exclusion of agenda items in the WHA. This article further agrees that academics wield multiple types of power in global governance processes and that these types of power mutually reinforce each other through the agenda-setting process.
Theorizing the Conceptualization of Power
Power is an “essentially contested” concept (Gallie, 1955) and has been conceptualized in markedly different ways (see Table 1). While many definitions of power have been influential in the power analysis, most provide a limited view on how actors can wield multiple and different types of power (Moon, 2019). For instance, Dahl’s definition does not account for how power can be exercised in international institutions without the direct use of force; Barnett and Duvall’s definition cannot explain how actors wield multiple types of power or how these different types of powers can build on one another (Moon, 2019).
This argument views power more inclusively as the “ability to shape the thinking and/or actors of other actors in the global public domain” (Moon, 2019). This definition accommodates eight types of power that actors can wield in a complex adaptive system (see Table 2). This article accepts this taxonomy because: (1) it recognizes that actors can wield different types of power; (2) it recognizes that actors can wield multiple types of power; (3) it acknowledges—by viewing the global health arena as a complex adaptive system composed of numerous non-linear interactions—that different types of power can build on each other. Overall, this provides a more holistic understanding of power dynamics in contemporary global health governance.
Table 1: Different Conceptualizations of Power

 
Table 2: Moon's Taxonomy of Power in Global Governance


Power Dynamics in Agenda-Setting: The Role of Academics in the 74th World Health Assembly
"The agenda setting process is an ongoing competition among issue proponents to gain the attention of media professionals, the public, and policy elites."  - Dearing and Rogers (1996)
Agenda-setting is a process of transforming private issues into public ones, and these, in turn, into governance priorities (Brasil & Jones, 2020). It is a process contingent on the ability to influence groups to action and persuade key policymakers (Puentes-Markides, 2007). When formulating an agenda, there are a number of policy issues which can be prioritized by different actors – governments, agencies and academics – thereby pushing other items down on the agenda.  
The most recent 74th WHA brought together 194 member-states with the aim of addressing a range of health-related challenges plaguing the international community. The Assembly also brought together different actors such as – experts, civil society organizations, foundations and partner agencies through a series of informal meetings to discuss current priorities and set the health agenda for the organization. This agenda, which included 72 items, was the largest agenda ever created. These items were prioritized depending on the magnitude and complexity of the respective issue. Items are usually included in the health agenda based on (1) an event or crisis; (2) evidence from existing programmes which suggests that a situation requires renewed attention; (3) values, beliefs or motivations that turn a condition or a situation into a problem; and (4) collective action by interest groups, protests, lobby and social movements on particular topic (Puentes-Markides, 2007).
One of the main topics of this session was the onus to launch an international treaty with binding international rules to strengthen the global pandemic preparedness and response. The WHO’s constitution allows it to create internationally binding instruments and tools (World Health Organization, 1946, art. 19, 21). Since its inception, the organization has exercised this power only two times – in the case of International Health Regulations (IHR) and the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). The successes of these two instruments, particularly the FCTC, pushed Director-General Tedros Ghebreyesus to call on world leaders to come together in solidarity to fight against the spread of the pandemic (World Health Organization, 2021). The pervasiveness, magnitude, and complexity of the pandemic also played a critical role in prioritizing this issue. The pandemic required world leaders to act now or be faced with consequences on a global scale, therefore making it appropriately placed at the top of the health agenda.
Traditionally, the WHO’s agenda is influenced by states and major non-state actors, such as civil society organizations or foundations. However, the role of experts, particularly academics, in shaping agenda-setting is increasing. Actors hoping to generate interest around an issue must show that it carries weight and has considerable social and political impacts on the general public. These actors should address the problem and convince the public, the media, politicians and civil society about the importance of putting this item on the agenda (Bendaoud, 2020). For an item to be included in the health agenda of the WHA, it needs to not only be supported by evidence, but also appeal to a sense of solidarity and unity (Bendaoud, 2020). The process of agenda-setting is shaped by the degree of power a specific actor wields in the respective issue domain. It is therefore evident that academics wield power in agenda-setting through writing academic articles, generating evidence, holding conferences, and meeting with decision-making, thereby building momentum for a specific issue to be placed on the health agenda.
One example of this agenda-setting power was the push by academics worldwide for the pandemic treaty. Many academics, especially Professor Illona Kickbusch, Co-chair of the Project on the Pandemic Treaty at the Global Health Center at the Graduate Institute, were vocal proponents of the treaty. When the idea was first introduced into the global health domain, Kickbusch advocated for it by addressing the need for the treaty, publishing articles and generating evidence, which was eventually read by different policy makers and scientists within the WHO. The item became one of the biggest priorities on the health agenda, resulting in a Special Session – the second special session in WHO’s history – to discuss the pandemic treaty and the need for binding international instruments to improve COVID-19 preparedness and response. While academics can be expected to hold expert power, they in fact wield multiple forms of power within the agenda-setting process. Kickbusch, an academic specializing in global health (expert power), was able to generate evidence and publish articles (discursive power), which were shared through personal networks (network power) to policy-makers and scientists in the WHO, who included the issue in the WHA agenda (institutional power). This example shows how academics have different types of power – expert, discursive, network and institutional – and how these types of power build on each other during the agenda-setting process.
In setting the health agenda, both state and traditional non-state actors have an important role in addressing the range of health-related challenges in the global arena. However, as this article attempted to show, academics also have an increasing role in influencing world affairs, particularly through agenda-setting in the WHA. This article employed Moon’s power taxonomy to show how academics wield power in the agenda-setting process and how one type of power can create other types of power in this process.


References
Barnett, M. & Duvall, R. (2005). Power in international politics. International Organization. 59, 39–75.

Barnett M. & Duvall, R. (2005). Power in global governance. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bendaoud, M. (2020). Understanding public policy agenda setting using the 4 P’s model: Power, perception,  potency and proximity. Montréal, QC: National Collaborating Centre for Healthy Public Policy.

Bourdieu P. (1992) The forms of capital. In M. Granovetter & G. Swedberg (Eds.), The sociology of economic  life. Westview Press.

Brasil, F. G. & Jones, B. D. (2020). Agenda setting: Policy change policy dynamics: A brief introduction.      	Brazilian Journal of Public Administration, 54(6), 1486-1497. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0034-     	  	761220200780x.

Dahl, R. A. (2005). Who governs? Democracy and Power in an American City. New Haven, CT: Yale   		University Press. (orig. edition 1961).

Dearing, J. W. & Rogers, E. (1996). Agenda-setting. SAGE Publications.

Foucault, M. (1979). The history of sexuality, part 1. London: Allen Lane.

Gallie, W. B. (1955^6) Essentially Contested Concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 56, 167-98.
Haring, R., Kickbusch, I., Ganten, D., & Moeti, M. (2021). Handbook of global health. Springer International  Publishing.
Hill, P.S. (2011). Understanding global health governance as a complex adaptive system. Global Public Health, 6, 593–605.

Kickbusch, I. & Bonk, M. (2014). Making the World Health Assembly fit for the 21st century [Editorial]. 		British Medical Journal, 348(7964). doi: 10.1136/bmj.g4079.       	

Lukes S. (2004). Power: A radical view. Macmillan International Higher Education.

Puentes-Markides, C. (2007). Policy analysis and decision making with emphasis on chronic 			non-communicable diseases. Pan-American Health Organization/World Health Organization.           	https://www3.paho.org/english/ad/dpc/nc/cmn-po-bar-7-4-pol-agenda.pdf.

World Health Organization. (1946). Constitution of the World Health Organization. American Journal of Public         	Health, 36(11), 1315-1323.


































II - Design and Global Health Governance                                                                     (1197 words)

Understanding and Predicting how the design of the WHA, in the context of the special session, impacts the WHO.   
Maéva CHABRIER

We figure out that the design of the WHA is a self-conscious creation of states, that means a rational design because states spend significant amounts of time and effort constructing institutions precisely because they can advance or impede state goals in global health. In fact, Health can be compared to a public good and according to(Koremenos and al, 2001) a public good should not be decomposed because successful cooperation requires joint action by all. Indeed, European powers started to establish arrangements to minimize the spread of certain infectious diseases and their potential harm to travel and trade in 1851 during the first International Sanitary Conference held in Paris(Moon, 2021). States  fought over institutional design, according to current challenges, because it affects outcomes, and they use diplomacy and conferences to select institutional features(Koremenos,2001). 
 
During the 74th WHA, members states have “decided to request the Director-General to convene a special session of the WHA in November 2021 and to include on the agenda of the special session only one item, dedicated to considering the benefits of developing a WHO convention, agreement and other international instrument on pandemic preparedness”(WHA74(16), 2021). 
 
Using concepts and theories of global governance, I focus on the origins and limits concerning the WHA and the special session 2. Then, I explore the foreseeable impact on the special session 2 and the treaty on the design of the WHO.
 
We precise that the willingness to  modify the design of the WHO in preparation of future pandemic has been sustained by diverse normative instruments & norms entrepreneurs” (Sikkink&Finnemore, 1998), I used the typology of Moon (2018) to interpret our case. 

Figure 1 : Moon’s Typology about diverse normative instruments involved in Global Health Law.  



 
Once the wish for a new design has been raised by different actors, the negotiations take place during the special session 2 between member states at WHA. We can consider how the design could be changed. 
 
The rational design can be modified in two ways according to Koremenos et al. 2001. 
First, states could prefer to create or select another institution. For instance, thinking back to the transfer of a part of the management of intellectual property rights from WIPO to WTO (Dinwoodie& Dreyfuss, 2009). Nonetheless, at that time we haven’t heard about a “club of vaccine” at the same point as “climate club” explained by Nordhaus&William, 2015 and Bäckstrand and al. 2018. States are more willing to reform the organization instead of creating another one. 
Second, Koremenos would say that WHA’s member states may modify the institution in stages, by making purposeful decisions as the COVID circumstances arise and states design explicit institutions to strengthen tacit cooperation. Indeed, states could decide to institutionalize the “vaccine diplomacy” understood as the transfer of doses, money(or both) for the enhancement of political relations(Storeng, 2021).
 
 The current design of the WHA, governing body of the WHO,  prevents the Assembly from taking timely decisions and being effective during emergencies such as COVID. The WHA discusses items presented by the Executive board and a special session can be requested if a majority of members asked for it. Limiting the capacity of the WHA to act quickly in case of emergency, because of the lack of immediate power to act. 
 
Figure 2 : WHO’s design explained by WHO’s document to explain the procedures used within the WHA. 
 
Given the emergency situation of covid, states have decided in may to request another meeting in December. The special session 2  is the second meeting this year of the WHA.  Thinking to J.Gray(2008) and her typology of the vitality of an organization(presented below) :
Figure 3 : J.Gray’s typology of the vitality of an organization. (Note that her theory hasn’t been thought for a health organization, but for an economic organization which promotes free trade, nonetheless we suppose that it could be comparable.)    
                    
(Sources for the pictures in the bibliography) 
 
We could underline that the reputation of “Geneva as the global health capital” for health diplomacy(Kickbusch and al. 2007) , ensures that the WHO’s secretariat is attractive enough.
If we focus on the Panel for Pandemic Preparedness & Response (PPPR 2021), we could think that the WHA can lead the WHO to be a “zombie” organization  due to a stiff agenda on a year basis and  one regular meeting per year that lead the WHO to produce a the lack of outputs regarding the pandemic. 
 
For the Panel, the WHO went on too late to characterize COVID-19 as a global pandemic (on 11 March 2020), whereas this would have been announced after the first meeting of the Emergency committee on 22 January 2020. Moreover, the WHO also should have said that countries should take the precaution of assuming that human-to-human transmission was occurring. But finally, the Panel’s conclusion is that surveillance and alert systems at national, regional, and global levels must be redesigned(PPPR, 2021), so it doesn’t only concern the WHO but multiple actors. 
Nonetheless, we could foresee that the special session 2 this year would allow the WHO to become more alive, due to the frequency of internal meetings that increase at the international level and the willingness of effective decisions, let us believe that concrete outcomes will be provided by the WHO after the session. But, we must consider that it is difficult to evaluate and deliver the outputs of the organization because it involves different actors at both the decision making process and the implementation of decisions made.
 
From a realist perspective, we could believe that states won’t accept to lose a part of their sovereignty in a binding treaty, but states get something in return, that means a solution to a collective action problem. 
The negotiation of the treaty should reduce uncertainty due to COVID, solve problems of incomplete information, reduce transaction costs and other barriers to welfare improvement for their members(Barnett et al. 2004). 
 
Furthermore, thinking back to Bernauer et al. 2013, the inclusion of positive incentives(as assistance for countries),  and dispute settlement mechanisms(allowing participating countries to resolve conflicts with stipulated rules and procedures) can promote international cooperation. Nevertheless, we also know that for environmental treaties, monitoring and enforcement mechanisms should decrease treaty participation mainly because of implementation costs and sovereignty concerns. So we hope that a depth-versus-participation perspective, which posits that “more demanding treaties discourage ratification”(Gilligan, 2004), won’t be accurate for the pandemic treaty. Knowing that agreements dealing with global public goods attract fewer countries, compared to agreements dealing with local public goods(Bernauer et al. 2013) we hope that Health is now considered by all states as universal because “Nobody is safe, until everyone is safe” according to WHO.
 
However, it could be interesting to know how the treaty and the possible changes wished could change the actual design of the WHA and WHO. At that time, we didn't have  a clear vision of decisions that would be made by member states but our theories could help us to make expectations. 
Using the design characteristics studied in the research of Koremenos and al.(2001) I coded the possible outcomes of the negotiation that would impact the design of the WHA/WHO, as below: 
 
 Table 1 : Attempt of the possible outcomes on the design of WHO, through the characteristics underlined by Koremenos and al.(2001). 
 

          In a nutshell, we apply the concepts and theories of global governance to understand the limits and weaknesses of the design of the WHA, which by design cannot take decisions in case of emergency. Finally, our theories and concepts help us to understand how the special session 2 could reshape, strengthen and empower both the WHO and the WHA. Our theories could help us to grasp what could be the future effects on the institution. 





References:
Bäckstrand, K., Zelli, F., & Schleifer, P. (2018). Legitimacy and Accountability in Polycentric Climate Governance. In A. Jordan, D. Huitema, H. Van Asselt, & J. Forster (Eds.), Governing Climate Change: Polycentricity in Action? (pp. 338-356). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/9781108284646.020   
Barnett. M, Finnemore. M .(2004) Rules for the world: International organizations in global politics. .  Cornell University Press; Chapter 1 and Chapter 6 

Bernauer, Thomas, Kalbhenn, Anna, Koubi, Vally, & Spilker, Gabriele (2013). “Is there a “depth versus participation” dilemma in international cooperation?”. The Review of International Organizations, 8(4), 477–497.

Dinwoodie, G. B., & Dreyfuss, R. C. (2009). Designing a Global Intellectual Property System Responsive to Change: The WTO, WIPO, and Beyond. Hous. L. Rev., 46, 1187.

Gilligan, M. J. (2004). Is There a Broader-Deeper Trade-off in International Multilateral Agreements?International Organization, 58(3), 459–484.

Gray, J (2018). “Life, Death, or Zombie? The Vitality of International Organizations”. International Studies Quarterly, 62(1), 1–13.

Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness & Response(2021). Covid-19: Make it the last pandemic. Available: https://theindependentpanel.org/mainreport/Kickbusch I. (2020).
Kickbusch, I., Silberschmidt, G., & Buss, P. (2007). Global health diplomacy: the need for new perspectives, strategic approaches and skills in global health. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 85, 230-232.
Koremenos, Barbara, Lipson, Charles, & Snidal, Duncan (2001). The Rational Design of International Institutions. International Organization, 55(4), 761–799.

Moon S.(2018) Global health law and governance: concepts, tools, actors, and power. In Research Handbook on Global Health Law, editors Gian Luca Burci and Brigit Toebes. Edgar Elgar.

Moon S. (2021). Global health: a centralized network searching (in vain) for hierarchy. In “Global Governance in a World of Change. Barnett, Michael; Pevehouse, Jon; Raustiala, Kal, editors, Oxford University Press. 

MSF. (2020, July 20). Open letter to Gavi Board Members: Inclusion of civil society in COVAX facility and COVAX AMC governance is essential. Médecins Sans Frontières Access Campaign. https://msfaccess.org/open-letter-gavi- board-members-inclusion-civil-society-covax-facility-and-covax-amc-governance  

Nordhaus, William(2015). "Climate Clubs: Overcoming Free-Riding in International Climate Policy." American Economic Review, 105(4): 1339-70. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/aer.15000001 

Storeng. K, Puyvallée. A  & Stein. F (2021): COVAX and the rise of the ‘super public private partnership’ for global health, Global Public Health, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17441692.2021.1987502   

Sikkink. K & Finnemore. M,(1998), ‘International Norm Dynamics and Political Change’  52 International Organization 887. 

World Health Organization, “Special session of the World Health Assembly to consider developing a WHO convention, agreement or other international instrument on pandemic preparedness and response” (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2021).

World Health Organization, “Constitution of the World Health Organization” (New York : World Health Organization, 1946). https://apps.who.int/gb/bd/PDF/bd47/EN/constitution-en.pdf?ua=1 
Webography : 
France + Germany (2020) https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-who-reform-exclusi/exclusive-germany-france-want-more-funding-power-for-who-as-part-of-sweeping-reforms-idUSKCN25F1TT
WHO, WIPO, WTO, Workshop on Innovation in, and Access to, COVID-19 Technologies – Virtual, visited on the 18th December 2021, at the adress  https://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/details.jsp?meeting id=65948
World Health organization,  “Executive Board”, who.int, visited on the 21th December 2021 at the address : https://www.who.int/about/governance/executive-board 

Pictures : 
Modèle 3D de Cimetière de dessin animé - TurboSquid 1310992 - visited on the 22th December - link:https://www.turbosquid.com/fr/3d-models/cartoon-cemetery-model-1310992 

Zombie Businessman | Brickipedia | FANDOM powered by Wikia - visited on the 22th December- link: 
https://vignette.wikia.nocookie.net/lego/images/5/5d/S14ZombieBusinessman.png/revision/latest?cb=20151009200224 

Hand : Getting Started: Petrol Station Business Plan | Caltex- Caltex.com-  visited on 22th december : link :https://www.caltex.com/my/investors/investor-support/business-development.html 

Annex 1: Press Release - WHO - 16th December. 
 
III- Legitimacy and Global Health Governance

Legitimacy of the World Health Assembly - Input, Output, and Throughput
Lydia Zhuo CHEN

                  The COVID-19 pandemic brought to light challenges to existing systems of global health governance. As an issue-area of global governance that has one of the most centralised and vertically hierarchical nodes of power – the World Health Organisation (WHO), within a field with a vast array of different actors with different capabilities and interests, the crisis did not simply reignite skepticism in effectiveness in its governance, but more fundamentally, whether it is justified in exercising that governmental role. Interestingly, the effectiveness of governance itself is to many also intuitively a facet in measuring the legitimacy of governance. As such the second special session of the World Health Assembly (WHA) was convened by the director-general based on a resolution adopted in the 74th WHA to establish a more legally powerful convention (colloquially referred to as the pandemic treaty) that would enable WHO to have more authority in eliciting legal compliance from member states in times of epidemic emergencies. As such, the WHA as the decision-making body of the WHO and the only arena where all member states meet and deliberate regularly to set agendas is a good facet to explore whether and in what ways the decision-making process at WHA and thus at WHO are legitimate. In this section, legitimacy is taken for granted as a normative concept that requires justification rather than a descriptive concept that simply refers to compliance of the governed. Thus, we will first entertain frameworks that suggest parametres in measuring how legitimate, and in what ways legitimacy manifests in international governance bodies. Then provide an overview of legitimating and delegitimating characteristics that the WHA possesses.
 
            	Democratic participation as a legitimating force is a less contested understanding of legitimacy today within nation-states. However, direct application to international governance poses obvious challenges due to fundamental differences between the subjects. However given that institutions of international governance, such as the WHO, observably are perceived to have a certain level of legitimacy, there must exist other sources of legitimacy and other legitimating mechanisms. Steffek for instance asserts that international institutions, through building platforms for deliberation and rational discourse in its decision-making process in clearly delineated issue areas, allows for legitimacy to be created as the process requires justification to be presented to and accepted by the governed. (Steffek, 2003, pp. 261,263-264). In other words, majoritarian rule through democratic procedures itself is insufficient in generating legitimacy, the process of deliberation that generates a “shared conviction about the normative validity” of the norms that guide collective decision making prior to a simple vote is the crucial element (Steffek, 2003, p. 264). This notion fits nicely into the framework of input, throughput, and output legitimacy (Schmidt, 2013) as a form of throughput legitimacy. Input concerns itself with legitimation from electoral representation; output is evidently outcome-oriented based on efficacy in addressing issues; whereas throughput is process-oriented and concerns the interactions of actors within the governance process, measured based on their accountability, transparency, inclusiveness, and openness (Schmidt, 2013, pp. 2,6). So while WHO can be challenged on the basis of its limited input legitimacy and arguable lack of output legitimacy during COVID-19, this section explores how, if so, it may possess throughput legitimacy that may in turn strengthen input and output legitimacy.
 
WHA’s throughput legitimacy
           	WHA convenes annually to discuss the agenda and areas of focus provisionally laid down by the Executive Board of WHO. Thus the makeup and procedures within the Executive Board affects tremendously the ability of the WHA to have legitimacy in its decisions. Hence, the composition of the Executive Board, itself being 34 elected and technically qualified experts within the field of global health lends itself to throughput legitimacy (WHO, Basic Documents, 2020). Bodansky suggests that expertise is instrumental to generating the best outcomes, and hence maximises legitimacy through effective governance, an output-oriented assertion (Bodansky, 1999, pp. 620-622). We can also, however, tie expertise in with Steffek’s notion of impersonal, objective deliberation that can be contested and debated on purely rational bases (Steffek, 2003, p. 261). In removing the oft conflictual political interests between nation-states, and the competitive interests between say different priorities in governance within a given nation state from the equation, the ideally non-political nature of scientific knowledge grants this agenda setting process throughput legitimacy. Once this agenda reaches the annual WHA, it is once again debated and deliberated by professional delegates from each member states who have their credentials verified by a committee (WHO, Credentials Report, 2021). While certainly it would be naïve to suggests that these personnel as agents of states are completely free from influence by home states guided by political interests, the process of ensuring that they are at least technically qualified provides a certain level of reassurance that states’ individual interests may influence final decisions but are not the main motivations for their participation. It indicates at least the norm dictates member states and other actors must justify their actions on the basis of reason and objective knowledge rather than simple self-interests, which provides a platform for potential cooperation and reconciliation of seemingly conflicting interests. Paragraph 9 of the WHA Special Procedures suggests that “consensus building” should be as much as possible the basis of decision making before resorting to a vote (WHO, Special Procedures). This highlights that WHA sees itself as a platform (1) to generate rational discourse between member states in the hopes of shaping perceptions of interests in a way that promotes cooperation and (2) that has the obligation of providing rational reasons for decision making that can only be generated through deliberation and not a simple declaration of preferences via voting.
 
WHA’s output and input legitimacy
        	As previously mentioned, the decision-making process could lend itself to output legitimacy by promoting the quality of governance. The emphasis on expertise and knowledge as rationale behind decisions means solutions to global issues cannot as easily subjected to structural power hierarchies. When in dire situations requiring global cooperation, like the ongoing pandemic, results that seemingly challenges state sovereignty to an extent that a realist could not fathom can be agreed upon – such is the case of the passing of the resolution regarding the pandemic treaty (WHO, "Pandemic Treaty", 2021). However, what it necessarily weakens is input legitimacy based on popular participation. Despite the fact that all member states possess equal footing at least on paper in shaping the final resolutions debated in WHA, and that even member states not elected to the Executive Board can participate in the deliberation process and submit issues to be put on the agenda, the nature of them being member states limits the representation of demographics concerned with issue areas exceeding the bounds of nationstates. Depending on regime type, the ability of the domestic government in representing the will of its own citizenry would then affect the effectiveness of these domestic concerns from being accurately represented by state delegations to the WHA, despite them being public health professionals. As such, this deficiency in input could translate to a deficiency in output.
 
         	To conclude, the WHA’s deliberative, consensus building procedures based on objective expertise and rational discourse grants it throughput legitimacy and output legitimacy in certain situations, however, it weakens the popular representation via input legitimacy.


References

Bodansky, D. (1999). The Legitimacy of International Governance: A Coming Challenge for International Environmental Law. American Journal of International Law, 596-624.

Steffek, J. (2003). The Legitimation of International Governance: A Discourse Approach. European Journal of International Relations, 249-275.

Schmidt, V. A. (2013). Democracy and Legitimacy in the European Union Revisited: Input, Output and ‘Throughput’post_. Political Studies, 2-22.

WHO. (2020). Basic Documents - Forty-ninth edition.

WHO. (2021). Decision-making and procedural issues at the hybrid Second special session of the World Health Assembly: A practical guide. WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY SECOND SPECIAL SESSION Provisional agenda item 1.1, (pp. 1-5).

WHO. (2021.). Special procedures: Report by the Director-General. WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY SECOND SPECIAL SESSION, (pp. 1-4).

WHO. (2021). The World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY SECOND SPECIAL SESSION, (pp. 1-4).

WHO. (2021). Committee on credentials: Report. WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY SECOND SPECIAL SESSION , (pp. 1-2).

 
IV- Complexity and Global Health Governance

Complexity Theory and Global Health Governance 
- based on the case study of Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB)
Heejae Lee 

This section will focus on the issue of complexity in governance by synthesizing complexity theory, and applying the concept of international regime complexity to the International Negotiating Body(INB). As Weiss and Wilkinson specified, “global governance” is a term which is ubiquitous, used and abused by academics and policymakers. (Weiss & Wikinson, 2014) The salience of critically engaging with the term “global governance” increases as more actors and agencies are introduced to the global arena, with more complex governance designs. 

Complexity theory and complex adaptive system and World Health Assembly (WHA)
Specifically in the global health domain, complexity becomes an imperative concept to interpret the challenges through the governance lens. The transition from international to global health reflects the rapid growth in the numbers and nature of stakeholders in health, as well as the constant change embodied in the process of globalization itself. (Hill, 2009) This complexity shifted the conceptual make up of WHA and its functions. WHA is the main decision making body of the WHO, comprising 195 members(Chorev, 2012), and non-state actors are not involved in the decision making process. The design of WHA was in a way to secure legitimacy of the decisions of WHA by relying on member-states’ legitimacy.  

How can complexity theory be utilized to understand global health governance? Ironically, complexity theory is complex by its nature. It has its roots in the physical and biological sciences. It was widely adapted in linguistics and semiotics, and the influence is now broadly diffused in the breadth of disciplinary engagement, allowing a confusing spectrum of perspectives and definitions. (Hill, 2009) Rosneau identified  the complex adaptive system as the core of complexity theory, and defined the complex adaptive system as a system, which is complex, and adaptive. (Rosenau, 2003; Hill, 2009) The characteristics of complex adaptive systems have been clustered and applied to health systems: the magnitude of the elements of the system, the rich and dynamic interactions, the non-linearity of the relationship, and relative independence of other elements within the system that initiate the potential complex outcomes. (Gatrell, 2005; Hill 2009) 

Global health governance shares the characteristics of complex adaptive systems, particularly with its multiple and diverse players, polyvalent and evolving relationships, and rich and dynamic interactions. (Hill, 2009) The constantly evolving characteristics of development in health has flagged the inadequacy of conventional models to capture the complexities of global health governance. (Fidler, 2007; Hill, 2009) The rapidly growing number of stakeholders from both public and private sectors, wield their power to shape the decision making processes outside of WHA, and not as a member of WHA. Examining global health governance through the frame of complexity theory may offer clearer insights to perceive current dynamics of governance (Hill, 2009) apart from the structural design of WHA, and give us a better framework to understand agencies of stakeholders and how they impact global health governance. 

What is the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB)?  
Recalling resolution WHA 74.7 and decision WHA 74(16), a decision was made to establish an Intergovernmental Negotiating Body(INB) open to all Member States and Associate Members to draft and negotiate a WHO convention, agreement or other international instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response with a view to adoption under Article 19, and other provisions of the WHO Constitutions as may be deemed appropriate by the INB. (WHO, 2021)

The main mandates of the INB will be addressing gaps in preventing, preparing for, and responding to health emergencies, including development and distribution of, and unhindered, timely and equitable access to, medical countermeasures. Moreover, INB will emphasize the need for a comprehensive and coherent approach to strengthen the global health architecture, and recognizing the commitment of Member States to develop a new instrument for pandemic prevention, preparedness and response with a whole-of-government and whole-of-society approach, prioritizing the need for equity. (WHO, 2021)

How can international regime complexity concepts be applied to INB?  
Alter and Meunier define international regime complexity as “the presence of nested, partially overlapping, and parallel international regimes that are not hierarchically ordered”.  (Alter & Meunier, 2009) International regime complexity is critical  in how it affects the strategies and interactions of actors in global settings. (Alter & Meunier, 2009) INB itself is another layer to the complexity of decision making processes, and yet it excludes its membership to Member States and Associate members, restricting the participation of all stakeholders. 

Implementation politics and INB
Lessons from implementation politics can be applied to further digest INB. International regime complexity contributes to international law fragmentation and rule ambiguity (Alter & Meunier, 2009), and due to states’ agency to select which rule to follow and which set of actors to be part of the negotiating process, INB will not be able to effectively pursue its mandate. The fragmentation of international rule and ambiguity of the definitions during implementation stage, the establishment of identity has a possibility to define INB as an extra layer of complexity rather than a method to emphasize the need for a comprehensive and coherent approach to strengthen the global health architecture, at is was specified as the main mandate.

Chessboard politics and INB 
International regime complexity enables cross institutional political strategies including forum-shopping, regime-shifting, and strategic inconsistency. (Alter & Meunier, 2009) Actors participating in INB can strategically select specific ideas, or form alliances to achieve favorable decisions. Further, as the name suggests, states will be in negotiations to reach a consensus, which allows actors more grounds to create networks within the negotiating body, and construct parallel venues to reach specific goals. 

Bounded Rationality and INB
Due to the complex nature of global governance, it is impossible to keep track of changes and rules within all institutions. (Alter & Meunier, 2009) Actors can selectively process information and rely on relations to ease overwhelming amounts of information. (Alter & Meunier, 2009) Therefore, international regime complexity can strengthen the expert’s agencies as they are the informers. This creates a new dynamic between actors in INB, as information is a pivotal element in decision making processes. Moreover, International regime complexity can increase actors’ reliance on heuristics (Alter & Meunier, 2009), and the way to influence actor behavior is to create framings and answers of problems. Actors participating in INB can use their resources to shift political framings, and to lead the negotiation to their benefits. Lastly, as causal complexity complicates the tasks of identifying optimal policies and assigning accountability for problematic decisions (Alter & Meunier, 2009). Bounded rationality can severely undermine the efficiency of INB, as the participation to INB is voluntary, and INB is not an independent decision making body. The decision needs to be in accordance with relevant Rules of Procedures and resolutions of the WHA, organizations of the UN system, and other intergovernmental organizations partnering with WHO. Therefore, INB creates opportunities for actors to voluntarily participate in INB, and selectively follow rules and regulations based on preferential information. 

Conclusion
Complexity theory and complex adaptive systems can be utilized to interpret global challenges through governance lens. The lessons learned from the international regime complexity theories indicate INB as an extra layer to the existing decision making process by WHA, and how actors will be able to use their power and legitimacy to acquire maximum benefits within the organizational structure of INB. 













References

Alter, K. J., & Meunier, S. (2009). The Politics of International Regime Complexity. Perspectives on Politics, 7(1), 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592709090033
 
Chorev N. (2012) The World Health Organization between North and South. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. (Chapter 1) 
 
Fidler, D.P., (2007). Architecture amidst anarchy: global health’s quest for governance. Global
Health Governance [online], 1 (1). Available from: http://www.ghgj.org/Fidler_1.1_
Architecture.htm [Accessed 25 February 2010].

Gatrell, A.C., (2005). Complexity theory and geographies of health: a critical assessment. Social
Science & Medicine, 60, 2661 2671.

Hill, P. S. (2011). Understanding global health governance as a complex adaptive system. Global Public Health, 6(6), 593–605. https://doi.org/10.1080/17441691003762108
 
Johnson, T., & Urpelainen, J. (2012). A Strategic Theory of Regime Integration and Separation. International Organization, 66(4), 645–677. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818312000264
Rosenau, J.N., (2003). Distant proximities: dynamics beyond globalization. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press

Weiss, T. G., & Wilkinson, R. (2014). Rethinking Global Governance? Complexity, Authority, Power, Change. International Studies Quarterly, 58(1), 207–215. https://doi.org/10.1111/isqu.12082

WHO and the WHA – an explainer. (2021). Retrieved 23 December 2021, from https://www.who.int/about/governance/world-health-assembly/seventy-fourth-world-health-assembly/the-who-and-the-wha-an-explainer

WHO. (2021). The World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. (n.d.). 2.






